Cystadenocarcinoma is a rare adenomatous pancreatic cancer that comes from the malignant degeneration of a mucous cystadenoma and is manifested by high abdominal pain and a palpable abdominal mass.
The diagnosis of cystadenocarcinoma is made by CT or MRI of the abdomen, which usually shows a cystic mass that contains remains; The mass can be misunderstood as a necrotic adenocarcinoma or a pancreatic pseudocyst.
Unlike ductal adenocarcinoma, cystadenocarcinoma has a relatively good prognosis.
Only 20% of patients have metastases at the time of surgery; Complete resection of the tumor by distal or total pancreatectomy or by a Whipple procedure determines a survival of 65% at 5 years.
Papillary-mucinous intraductal tumor is a tumor that causes hypersecretion of mucus and ductal obstruction.
Histology can be benign, borderline or malignant.
Most tumors (80%) affect women and are located in the tail of the pancreas (66%).
The symptoms of intraductal papillary mucinous tumor consist of pain and recurrent episodes of pancreatitis.
The diagnosis of intraductal papillary mucinous tumor is made by CT, sometimes together with endoscopic ultrasound, magnetic resonance cholangipancreatography or ERCP.
Surgical resection is the treatment of choice for patients with intraductal papillary-mucinous tumor with high-grade dysplasia who have progressed to invasive carcinoma or who have characteristics that suggest a high risk of developing cancer.
With surgery, the 5-year survival is> 95% in benign or borderline cases, but 50-75% in malignant tumors.
Erythroblastosis fetalis is hemolytic anemia in the fetus (or neonate, as erythroblastosis neonatorum) caused by transplacental transmission of maternal antibodies to fetal red blood cells.
The disorder usually results from incompatibility between maternal and fetal blood groups, often Rho(D) antigens.
Diagnosis begins with prenatal maternal antigenic and antibody screening and may require paternal screening, serial measurement of maternal antibody titers, and fetal testing. 
Treatment may involve intrauterine fetal transfusion or neonatal exchange transfusion. 
Prevention is Rho(D) immune globulin injection for women who are Rh-negative.
Erythroblastosis fetalis classically results from Rho(D) incompatibility, which may develop when a woman with Rh-negative blood is impregnated by a man with Rh-positive blood and conceives a fetus with Rh-positive blood, sometimes resulting in hemolysis.
Other fetomaternal incompatibilities that can cause erythroblastosis fetalis involve the Kell, Duffy, Kidd, MNSs, Lutheran, Diego, Xg, P, Ee, and Cc antigen systems, as well as other antigens. 
Incompatibilities of ABO blood types do not cause erythroblastosis fetalis.
Fetal red blood cells (RBCs) normally move across the placenta to the maternal circulation throughout pregnancy. 
Movement is greatest at delivery or termination of pregnancy. 
Movement of large volumes (eg, 10 to 150 mL) is considered significant fetomaternal hemorrhage; it can occur after trauma and sometimes after delivery or termination of pregnancy. 
In women who have Rh-negative blood and who are carrying a fetus with Rh-positive blood, fetal RBCs stimulate maternal antibody production against the Rh antigens. 
The larger the fetomaternal hemorrhage, the more antibodies produced. 
The mechanism is the same when other antigen systems are involved; however, Kell antibody incompatibility also directly suppresses RBC production in bone marrow.
Other causes of maternal anti-Rh antibody production include injection with needles contaminated with Rh-positive blood and inadvertent transfusion of Rh-positive blood.
No complications develop during the initial sensitizing pregnancy; however, in subsequent pregnancies, maternal antibodies cross the placenta and lyse fetal RBCs, causing anemia, hypoalbuminemia, and possibly high-output heart failure or fetal death. 
Anemia stimulates fetal bone marrow to produce and release immature RBCs (erythroblasts) into fetal peripheral circulation (erythroblastosis fetalis). 
Hemolysis results in elevated indirect bilirubin levels in neonates, causing kernicterus. 
Usually, isoimmunization does not cause symptoms in pregnant women.
At the first prenatal visit, all women are screened for blood type, Rh type, and anti-Rho(D) and other antibodies that are formed in response to antigens and that can cause erythroblastosis fetalis (reflex antibody screening). 
If women have Rh-negative blood and test positive for anti-Rho(D) or they test positive for another antibody that can cause erythroblastosis fetalis, the father’s blood type and zygosity (if paternity is certain) are determined. 
If he has Rh-negative blood and is negative for the antigen corresponding to the antibody identified in the mother, no further testing is necessary. 
If he has Rh-positive blood or has the antigen, maternal anti-Rh antibody titers are measured. 
If titers are positive but less than a laboratory-specific critical value (usually 1:8 to 1:32), they are measured every 2 to 4 weeks after 20 weeks.
If the critical value is exceeded, fetal middle cerebral artery (MCA) blood flow is measured at intervals of 1 to 2 weeks depending on the initial blood flow result and patient history; the purpose is to detect high-output heart failure, indicating high risk of anemia. 
Elevated blood flow for gestational age should prompt consideration of percutaneous umbilical blood sampling and intrauterine blood transfusion.
If paternity is reasonably certain and the father is likely to be heterozygous for Rho(D), the fetus’s Rh type is determined. 
If fetal blood is Rh positive or status is unknown and if MCA blood flow is elevated, fetal anemia is likely.
When Rho(D) status is uncertain, noninvasive cell-free fetal DNA screening of maternal blood for the RHD gene can be done. 
This test is available in North America. 
Noninvasive testing of other genes (eg, RHCE, KEL) is available in Europe.
If fetal anemia is likely, the fetus can be given intravascular intrauterine blood transfusions by a specialist at an institution equipped to care for high-risk pregnancies. 
Transfusions occur every 1 to 2 weeks, usually until 32 to 35 weeks. 
During that time period, delivery may be recommended if there is continuing evidence of severe fetal anemia (based on MCA blood flow). 
The woman may continue to term delivery if there is no evidence of severe fetal anemia based on MCA blood flow. 
Corticosteroids should be given before the first transfusion if the pregnancy is > 24 weeks, possibly > 23 weeks.
Delivery should be as atraumatic as possible. 
Manual removal of the placenta should be avoided because it may force fetal cells into maternal circulation.


Maternal sensitization and antibody production due to Rh incompatibility can be prevented by giving the woman Rho(D) immune globulin. 
This preparation contains high titers of anti-Rh antibodies, which neutralize Rh-positive fetal RBCs. 
Because fetomaternal transfer and likelihood of sensitization is greatest at termination of pregnancy, the preparation is given within 72 hours after termination of each pregnancy, whether by delivery, abortion, or treatment of ectopic pregnancy. 
The standard dose is 300 mcg IM. 
A rosette test can be used to rule out significant fetomaternal hemorrhage, and if results are positive, a Kleihauer-Betke (acid elution) test can measure the amount of fetal blood in the maternal circulation.
If test results indicate fetomaternal hemorrhage is massive (> 30 mL whole blood), additional injections (300 mcg for every 30 mL of fetal whole blood, up to 5 doses within 24 hours) are necessary.


If given only after delivery or termination of pregnancy, treatment is occasionally ineffective because sensitization can occur earlier during pregnancy. 
Therefore, at about 28 weeks, all pregnant women with Rh-negative blood and no known prior sensitization are given a dose of Rho(D) immune globulin. 
Some experts recommend a 2nd dose if delivery has not occurred by 40 weeks. 
Rho(D) immune globulin should also be given after any episode of vaginal bleeding and after amniocentesis or chorionic villus sampling.
Pancreatic cancer, primarily ductal adenocarcinoma, accounts for an estimated 55,440 cases and 43,330 deaths in the US annually (1). 
Symptoms include weight loss, abdominal pain, and jaundice. 
Diagnosis is by CT, endoscopic ultrasonography, and MRI. 
Treatment is surgical resection and adjuvant chemotherapy and radiation therapy. 
Prognosis is poor because disease is often advanced at the time of diagnosis.
Most pancreatic cancers are exocrine tumors that develop from ductal and acinar cells. 
Pancreatic endocrine tumors are discussed elsewhere.
Adenocarcinomas of the exocrine pancreas arise from duct cells 9 times more often than from acinar cells; 80% occur in the head of the gland. 
Adenocarcinomas appear at the mean age of 55 years and occur 1.5 to 2 times more often in men.
Prominent risk factors for pancreatic cancer include smoking, a history of chronic pancreatitis, obesity, being male, and being black. 
Heredity plays some role. 
Alcohol and caffeine consumption do not seem to be risk factors.
Symptoms of pancreatic cancer such as pain and weight loss are nonspecific, leading to a later diagnosis by which time the disease has spread. 
By the time of diagnosis, 90% of patients have locally advanced tumors that have involved retroperitoneal structures, spread to regional lymph nodes, or metastasized to the liver or lung.
Most patients have severe upper abdominal pain, which usually radiates to the back. 
Weight loss is common. 
Adenocarcinomas of the head of the pancreas cause obstructive jaundice (which can cause pruritus) in 80 to 90% of patients. 
Cancer in the body and tail may cause splenic vein obstruction, resulting in splenomegaly, gastric and esophageal varices, and gastrointestinal hemorrhage.
The cancer causes diabetes in 25 to 50% of patients, leading to symptoms of glucose intolerance (eg, polyuria and polydipsia). 
Pancreatic cancer can also interfere with production of digestive enzymes by the pancreas (pancreatic exocrine insufficiency) in some patients and with the ability to break down food and absorb nutrients (malabsorption). 
This malabsorption causes bloating and gas and a watery, greasy, and/or foul-smelling diarrhea, leading to weight loss and vitamin deficiencies.
The preferred tests are an abdominal helical CT using pancreatic technique, MRCP, or endoscopic ultrasonography. 
If these tests show apparent unresectable or metastatic disease, a percutaneous needle aspiration of an accessible lesion might be considered to obtain a tissue diagnosis. 
If CT shows a potentially resectable tumor or no tumor, MRCP or endoscopic ultrasonography may be used to stage disease or detect small tumors not visible with CT. 
Patients with obstructive jaundice may have endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) as the first diagnostic procedure.
Routine laboratory tests should be done. 
Elevation of alkaline phosphatase and bilirubin indicate bile duct obstruction or liver metastases. 
Pancreas-associated antigen CA 19-9 may be used to monitor patients diagnosed with pancreatic carcinoma and to screen those at high risk (eg, those with hereditary pancreatitis; = 2 first-degree family members with pancreatic cancer, Peutz-Jeghers syndrome, or BRCA2 or HNPCC mutations). 
However, this test is not sensitive or specific enough to be used for population screening.
Elevated levels should drop with successful treatment; subsequent increases indicate progression. 
Amylase and lipase levels are usually normal.
About 80 to 90% of cancers are considered surgically unresectable at time of diagnosis because of metastases or invasion of major blood vessels. 
Depending on location of the tumor, the procedure of choice for resection of the cancer is most commonly a Whipple procedure (pancreaticoduodenectomy). 
Adjuvant therapy with gemcitabine-based combinations is now recommended (1) and external beam radiation therapy is typically given, resulting in about 40% 2-year and 25% 5-year survival. 
This combination is also used for patients with localized but unresectable tumors and results in median survival of about 1 year. 
Gemcitabine and other drugs may be more effective than 5-fluorouracil–based chemotherapy, but no drug, singly or in combination, is clearly superior in prolonging survival. 
Patients with hepatic or distant metastases may be offered chemotherapy as part of an investigational program, but the outlook is dismal with or without such treatment and some patients may choose to forego it.
If an unresectable tumor is found at operation and gastroduodenal or bile duct obstruction is present or pending, a double gastric and biliary bypass operation is usually done to relieve obstruction. 
In patients with inoperable lesions and jaundice, endoscopic placement of a bile duct stent relieves jaundice. 
Duodenal stenting is frequently done. 
However, surgical bypass should be considered in patients with unresectable lesions if life expectancy is > 6 to 7 months because of complications associated with stents.
Ultimately, most patients experience pain and die. 
Thus, symptomatic treatment is as important as controlling disease. 
Appropriate end-of-life care should be discussed (see also The Dying Patient).
Patients with moderate to severe pain should receive an oral opioid in doses adequate to provide relief. 
Concern about addiction should not be a barrier to effective pain control. 
For chronic pain, long-acting preparations (eg, transdermal fentanyl, oxycodone, oxymorphone) are usually best. 
Percutaneous or operative splanchnic (celiac) block effectively controls pain in some patients. 
In cases of intolerable pain, opioids given subcutaneously or by IV, epidural, or intrathecal infusion provides additional relief.
If palliative surgery or endoscopic placement of a biliary stent fails to relieve pruritus secondary to obstructive jaundice, pruritis can be managed with cholestyramine (4 g orally once a day to 4 times a day).
Exocrine pancreatic insufficiency is treated with capsules of porcine pancreatic enzymes (pancrelipase). 
There are a number of commercial products available and the amount of enzyme per capsule varies.
The dosage needed varies depending on the patient's symptoms, the degree of steatorrhea, and the fat content of the diet. 
Typically, patients should take enough enzyme supplement to supply about 25,000 to 40,000 IU of lipase before a typical meal and about 5,000 to 25,000 IU of lipase per snack. 
If a meal is prolonged (as in a restaurant), some of the tablets should be taken during the meal. 
Optimal intraluminal pH for the enzymes is 8; thus, some clinicians give a proton pump inhibitor or H2 blocker twice a day. 
Diabetes mellitus should be closely monitored and controlled.